--------------------------------------------------
 GIT
 -------------------------------------------------\\

What is GIT?
Git is a distributed version control system (DVCS) that helps developers track changes, collaborate on projects, and manage source code efficiently. It was created by Linus Torvalds in 2005 and is widely used in software development.

What is the difference between GIT & Github?

Git: Git is the version control system itself. It is a command-line tool and a set of protocols for managing and tracking changes in source code and other text-based files.
GitHub: GitHub is a web-based platform that provides hosting for Git repositories. It offers a user-friendly interface for managing Git repositories, collaboration tools like issue tracking, and more. GitHub also hosts millions of open-source and private repositories.
Why do we use GIT?
Git is used for several reasons:

Version Control: It tracks changes to code over time, allowing developers to revert to previous versions if needed.
Collaboration: Multiple developers can work on the same project concurrently and merge their changes.
Branching: Git enables the creation of branches for different features or bug fixes, keeping the main codebase stable.
Backup: Git provides a secure way to store and backup code, reducing the risk of data loss.
What is SCM & VCS?

SCM (Source Code Management): SCM is a broader term that encompasses the management of source code and related assets, including version control. Git is a popular SCM tool.
VCS (Version Control System): VCS is a subset of SCM focused specifically on tracking changes in source code, managing different versions, and facilitating collaboration among developers. Git is a VCS.
What are the steps to push code to a GitHub Repository?
To push code to a GitHub repository, you typically follow these steps:

Clone the repository to your local machine using git clone.
Make changes to the code.
Stage the changes using git add.
Commit the changes using git commit.
Push the committed changes to the GitHub repository using git push.
Why do we commit?
Committing in Git is a way to save a snapshot of your code at a particular point in time. It helps in tracking changes, providing a historical record, and making it possible to revert to previous versions if issues arise. Commits also serve as a form of documentation for code changes.

What are the commands of GIT to push the code?
The primary Git commands to push code to a remote repository (e.g., GitHub) are:

git add: Stage changes for commit.
git commit: Commit staged changes.
git push: Push committed changes to a remote repository.
How can you merge a Git repository with another?
To merge one Git repository with another, you can use the git remote and git fetch commands to fetch changes from one repository and merge them into another using git merge. Here are the basic steps:

Add the remote repository using git remote add.
Fetch changes from the remote repository using git fetch.
Merge the fetched changes into your local repository using git merge.
What is branching in Git?
Branching in Git involves creating separate lines of development, allowing developers to work on features or fixes independently without affecting the main codebase. Branches are lightweight and can be merged back into the main branch when the work is complete.

Different types of branching in Git?
There are two main types of branches in Git:

Feature Branches: These are created to develop new features or enhancements. Once the feature is complete, it can be merged into the main branch (e.g., master or main).
Release/Branch Branches: These are created for preparing a stable release. Bug fixes and minor updates can be made in this branch while the main development continues separately.
What is a merge conflict in Git?
A merge conflict occurs when Git cannot automatically reconcile differences between two branches being merged. It happens when the same part of a file is modified in both branches, and Git is unsure which changes to keep.

How can you resolve a merge conflict when merging the same project in the same branch?
To resolve a merge conflict when merging the same project in the same branch, follow these steps:

Identify the conflicted files by using git status or a merge tool.
Open the conflicted files in a text editor.
Manually edit the files to keep the desired changes while removing conflict markers (e.g., <<<<<<<, =======, >>>>>>>).
Save the resolved files.
Use git add to stage the resolved files.
Commit the changes with a message describing the conflict resolution.
Complete the merge by running git merge --continue or git commit (depending on your Git version).
Push the merged changes to the remote repository using git push.
This process ensures that the conflicting changes are resolved and the branch is updated with the resolved code.



====================================================
Jenkins
====================================================

What is Jenkins?
Jenkins is an open-source automation server that facilitates Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Delivery (CD) in software development. It allows developers to automate building, testing, and deploying applications by creating pipelines that define the workflow of these processes.

Why do we use Jenkins?
Jenkins is used for various reasons:

Automating repetitive tasks in the software development lifecycle.
Ensuring code quality through automated testing.
Integrating code changes from multiple contributors.
Accelerating the delivery of software by automating the deployment process.
Providing a centralized platform for managing CI/CD pipelines.
What are other tools/technologies besides Jenkins for CI/CD?
There are several CI/CD tools and technologies besides Jenkins, including:

Travis CI
CircleCI
GitLab CI/CD
GitHub Actions
Bamboo
TeamCity
GoCD
Drone CI
Azure DevOps (formerly Visual Studio Team Services)
How to move Jenkins from one server to another?
To move Jenkins from one server to another, you need to:

Back up the Jenkins home directory.
Install Jenkins on the new server.
Restore the Jenkins home directory backup to the new server.
Adjust configurations if necessary.
Start the Jenkins service on the new server.
How to create a Jenkins backup?
To create a Jenkins backup, you can:

Copy the entire Jenkins home directory, which contains all job configurations, build histories, and plugins.
Use the "ThinBackup" plugin to automate backups.
Export job configurations and settings using the Jenkins Job DSL plugin.
What are plugins in Jenkins?
Jenkins plugins are extensions that enhance the functionality of Jenkins. They allow you to add features, integrations, and customizations to your Jenkins environment. Plugins can provide additional build steps, source code management options, notifications, and more.

What are the default plugins installed in Jenkins?
The default plugins installed in Jenkins may vary based on the installation method and version. However, some common default plugins include:

Git Plugin: Provides Git integration.
Workspace Cleanup Plugin: Cleans up workspace after builds.
Credentials Plugin: Manages credentials.
Matrix Authorization Strategy Plugin: Controls access to Jenkins.
JUnit Plugin: Publishes JUnit test results.
Mailer Plugin: Sends email notifications.
Maven Integration Plugin: Integrates with Apache Maven.
Pipeline Plugin: Supports Jenkins Pipelines.
How to schedule builds in Jenkins?
You can schedule builds in Jenkins using the "Build Triggers" section in your job configuration. You can set up periodic builds by using the "Build periodically" option and specifying a cron-like schedule.

Difference between Ant, Maven, and Gradle?

Ant: Ant is a build tool primarily used for building Java projects. It uses XML-based build scripts and offers flexibility but lacks dependency management.
Maven: Maven is a build automation and project management tool. It uses conventions and a Project Object Model (POM) to manage dependencies, build, and project structure.
Gradle: Gradle is a build tool that combines the flexibility of Ant with the convention-based approach of Maven. It uses Groovy or Kotlin DSL for build scripts and offers advanced dependency management.
Difference between Jenkins, TeamCity, and Bamboo?

Jenkins: Open-source, highly customizable, and extensible CI/CD automation server.
TeamCity: Commercial CI/CD server by JetBrains with a user-friendly interface, excellent .NET support, and advanced features.
Bamboo: Commercial CI/CD server by Atlassian that integrates well with other Atlassian products, offering build and deployment automation.
How to configure cloud access in Jenkins?
To configure cloud access in Jenkins, you can use plugins like "Amazon EC2 Plugin" or "Docker Plugin." These plugins allow Jenkins to provision and manage cloud-based build agents dynamically.

What are Jenkins slaves?
Jenkins slaves (also known as build agents or nodes) are remote machines configured to execute jobs and build tasks delegated by the Jenkins master server. They help distribute the workload and enable parallel execution of builds.

How to run a Groovy script in Jenkins?
You can run a Groovy script in Jenkins using the "Groovy Plugin." Create a new build step or post-build action and select "Execute Groovy script." Then, provide your Groovy script within the Jenkins job configuration.

What is Jenkins Pipeline?
Jenkins Pipeline is a suite of plugins that allows you to define and manage your CI/CD pipelines as code. It provides a way to describe entire build and deployment processes in a version-controlled, human-readable format.

What are the different types of Jenkins Pipeline?
There are two main types of Jenkins Pipeline:

Declarative Pipeline: Uses a structured and simplified syntax for defining pipelines.
Scripted Pipeline: Employs a more flexible, Groovy-based scripting syntax for defining pipelines.
What is Declarative Pipeline in Jenkins?
Declarative Pipeline is a simplified and structured way to define pipelines in Jenkins using a domain-specific language (DSL). It offers an easy-to-read and maintainable format for describing build and deployment processes.

Is Jenkins a CI tool or both CI/CD?
Jenkins is primarily a CI (Continuous Integration) tool, but it can also be extended to support CD (Continuous Delivery) and even Continuous Deployment by configuring pipelines and integrating with deployment tools.

How to install Jenkins with non-root access in Linux?
You can install Jenkins with non-root access in Linux by downloading the Jenkins WAR file and running it in a user's home directory or a location where you have write permissions. You can specify a custom port for Jenkins to listen on.

Assigning Jenkins access and permissions for 200 employees:
To assign Jenkins access and permissions for a large number of employees, you can:

Integrate Jenkins with an LDAP or Active Directory server for user authentication.
Create Jenkins roles and groups to manage access control.
Use Jenkins plugins like "Role-based Authorization Strategy" for fine-grained access control.
Define permissions based on job requirements and assign users to relevant groups or roles.
Regularly review and update permissions as needed to ensure security and compliance.

----------------------------------------------

Ansible

-------------------------------------------------



What is Ansible?
Ansible is an open-source automation tool that simplifies the configuration management, application deployment, and task automation of IT infrastructure. It uses a declarative language to describe system configurations and automates tasks through playbooks.

What is Configuration Management?
Configuration management is the practice of systematically managing and controlling changes to the software and hardware configurations of an IT system. It ensures that systems are in a desired state, consistent, and can be easily replicated.

Is Ansible only a tool for Configuration Management?
No, Ansible is not limited to configuration management alone. While it excels in configuration management, it is also used for application deployment, task automation, and orchestrating complex workflows.

What are the components of Ansible?
The key components of Ansible include:

Control Node: The machine where Ansible is installed and from which automation is executed.
Managed Nodes: The remote systems that Ansible manages.
Inventory: A list of managed nodes that Ansible can connect to.
Playbooks: YAML files that define automation tasks and configurations.
Roles: Organizational units for playbooks and tasks.
Modules: Reusable, self-contained units of code for specific tasks.
Facts: System information collected from managed nodes.
Handlers: Tasks triggered by other tasks.
Vault: Tool for encrypting sensitive data.
How Ansible works?
Ansible works by connecting to managed nodes via SSH or other methods, then executing tasks defined in playbooks using modules. It collects facts about managed nodes, applies configurations, and reports results back to the control node.

What are the other tools in the market other than Ansible?
Other tools similar to Ansible for automation and configuration management include Puppet, Chef, SaltStack, and Terraform for infrastructure provisioning.

How Ansible is different from Chef & Puppet?

Ansible is agentless and works over SSH, while Chef and Puppet use agents.
Ansible playbooks are written in YAML, while Chef uses Ruby (DSL) and Puppet uses its own declarative language.
Ansible is known for its simplicity and ease of learning, while Chef and Puppet have steeper learning curves.
Chef and Puppet are better suited for managing large-scale infrastructures, while Ansible is versatile and can be used for a wide range of tasks.
What is Inventory in Ansible?
An Ansible inventory is a list of managed nodes (hosts) grouped into categories (groups) that Ansible can connect to. It is a configuration file that defines where and how Ansible should run tasks.

What are the types of Inventories?
Inventories can be static (defined in a file) or dynamic (generated on-the-fly, e.g., using scripts or cloud provider APIs). Dynamic inventories are useful for large and dynamically changing infrastructures.

What is a play & playbook?

Play: A play in Ansible is a list of tasks that are executed on a specific set of hosts. It represents a single unit of work.
Playbook: A playbook is a YAML file that defines a series of plays, tasks, and configurations. It orchestrates multiple tasks and is the main building block for Ansible automation.
Difference between hosts & groups?

Hosts: Hosts are individual machines or nodes that Ansible manages. They are identified by their hostnames or IP addresses.
Groups: Groups are collections of hosts. They allow you to apply configurations and tasks to multiple hosts simultaneously. Groups can be nested within other groups.
What are Roles?
Roles in Ansible are a way to organize and encapsulate playbooks and tasks into reusable units. They help in structuring automation code and make it more modular and maintainable.

How to install a Role?
You can install a role using the ansible-galaxy command, for example: ansible-galaxy install username.rolename.

How to install multiple roles?
You can specify multiple roles in a requirements file and use the ansible-galaxy command with the -r option to install them all at once.

How to create roles?
Roles are typically created using the ansible-galaxy command-line tool, which generates the necessary directory structure and files for a role. You can then customize the role's tasks, variables, and templates as needed.

What is Dynamic Inventory & when is it used?
Dynamic inventory is a way of generating Ansible inventories dynamically based on the state of your infrastructure. It is used in dynamic and cloud-based environments where the list of hosts can change frequently.

Where is the Ansible Configuration file located?
The Ansible configuration file, ansible.cfg, can be located in multiple places, including the current directory, the user's home directory, or in /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg. The file specifies Ansible settings and preferences.

What are the different ways other than SSH by which Ansible can connect to remote hosts?
While SSH is the most common method, Ansible can also connect to remote hosts using other protocols like WinRM for Windows hosts, and custom modules can enable additional connection methods.

What is a variable in Ansible?
Variables in Ansible are used to store data that can be referenced in playbooks, roles, and templates. They allow you to parameterize and customize your automation tasks.

What are different types of variables?
There are various types of variables in Ansible, including:

Global Variables: Defined in the Ansible configuration file.
Inventory Variables: Defined in the inventory file.
Playbook Variables: Defined in playbooks.
Role Variables: Defined within roles.
Fact Variables: Automatically collected information about managed nodes.
How to assign variables in group vars & host vars?
Variables can be assigned in group vars and host vars by creating YAML files in the respective directories within your Ansible project. Group vars apply to all hosts in a group, while host vars are specific to individual hosts.

Difference between File & Template directory in Roles?

The "files" directory in a role contains static files that are copied as-is to remote hosts.
The "templates" directory contains Jinja2 templates that can be customized before being copied to remote hosts.
Difference between default & vars directory in Roles?

The "defaults" directory in a role contains default variable values.
The "vars" directory can be used to define additional variables specific to the role.
What is a Jinja2 template?
Jinja2 is a templating engine used in Ansible to generate dynamic content within playbooks and templates. It allows you to embed variables and logic within templates.

What are modules in Ansible?
Modules in Ansible are reusable units of code that perform specific tasks on remote hosts. They are executed as part of tasks in playbooks.

Difference between COPY & FILE modules?

The copy module is used to copy files from the control node to remote hosts.
The file module is used to manage files and directories on remote hosts, including creating, deleting, and changing permissions.
Difference between SHELL & COMMAND modules?

The shell module is used to execute shell commands on remote hosts, and it involves launching a shell process.
The command module is used to execute a command without
launching a shell process on remote hosts. It is preferred for running non-interactive, command-line programs.

What is the Setup module? What does it do?
The setup module is used to gather facts about remote hosts. It collects information such as hardware details, OS version, network configuration, and more. These facts can be used in playbooks and templates.

What is register and debug in Ansible?

register is used in Ansible to capture the output of a task and store it in a variable. It allows you to reuse the task's result in subsequent tasks or display it using the debug module.
debug is a module that prints information to the console during playbook execution. It is often used to display the value of variables or the result of a task for debugging purposes.
What is changed_when in Ansible?
The changed_when statement in Ansible allows you to control whether a task is considered "changed" or not based on a condition. You can use it to customize the criteria for determining whether a task should be reported as "changed" in the playbook results.

Can we disable automatic facts gathering in Ansible?
Yes, you can disable automatic facts gathering in Ansible by setting gather_facts: no in a playbook or using the -e option to set it to no when running a playbook. This can be useful when you don't need to collect facts for certain tasks.

How can error handling be done in Ansible?
Error handling in Ansible can be done using:

failed_when to specify conditions under which a task should be considered failed.
ignore_errors to ignore specific errors and continue executing the playbook.
block and rescue for more advanced error handling, allowing you to define tasks to run in case of an error.
How to ignore failed commands in Ansible?
You can use the ignore_errors: yes parameter in a task to ignore any errors that occur during the execution of that specific task. This allows the playbook to continue running even if the task fails.

What are handlers? Why do we use Handlers in Ansible?
Handlers in Ansible are tasks that are triggered by other tasks. They are typically used for actions that should be performed only if changes have been made. Handlers are defined in roles or playbooks and are notified by other tasks when changes occur.

What is Privilege Escalation in Ansible?
Privilege escalation in Ansible refers to the process of switching to a more privileged user (usually using sudo) to perform tasks that require elevated privileges on remote hosts. It allows Ansible to execute commands with administrative rights.

Task to connect (SSH) Ansible to a remote host using another user and run the playbook with another user?
You can use the ansible_user parameter to specify the user to use for SSH connection to a remote host. Additionally, you can use the --user command-line option when running the playbook to specify the user for playbook execution.

What is Ansible Vault?
Ansible Vault is a feature that allows you to encrypt sensitive data, such as passwords, API keys, and other secrets, in Ansible playbooks and variable files. It ensures that confidential information is stored securely.

How to decrypt a vault file?
To decrypt an Ansible Vault-encrypted file, you can use the ansible-vault decrypt command and provide the necessary password or credentials when prompted.

How to encrypt a string in Ansible using Ansible Vault?
You can encrypt a string using Ansible Vault by using the ansible-vault encrypt_string command. It will prompt you for the encryption password, and the encrypted string can be stored in a playbook or variable file.

If a string is encrypted in a file with a password, how to pass the password using a parameter while decrypting?
You can pass the password using the --vault-password-file parameter when decrypting a file. This parameter should point to a file containing the encryption password.

If a file is encrypted using a password, and the password is stored in a file, how to pass the file to decrypt the file?
You can use the --vault-password-file parameter followed by the path to the file containing the password when decrypting the file.

If a file is encrypted using a password, and the password is also encrypted, how to provide the password while decrypting the file?
In this case, you need to decrypt the password first using Ansible Vault and then use the decrypted password to decrypt the file.

What is Ansible Galaxy?
Ansible Galaxy is a repository of community-contributed Ansible roles and collections. It allows Ansible users to easily find, share, and reuse roles and collections for various tasks and configurations.

What are Tags in Ansible? Why are they used?
Tags in Ansible are labels that can be applied to tasks within playbooks. They are used to selectively run specific tasks in a playbook, making it possible to execute only the tasks that are relevant to a particular scenario or purpose.

What is lookup in Ansible playbook?
The lookup plugin in Ansible is used to retrieve data from external sources or files and use it within playbooks. It is often used to read data from files or fetch information from external systems.

How to control command failure in Ansible?
You can control command failure in Ansible using error-handling mechanisms like failed_when, ignore_errors, and block statements to specify under what conditions a task should be considered failed or ignored.

How to debug your playbook in Ansible?
You can debug your playbook in Ansible by using the debug module to print variable values, by enabling verbose output using the -v or -vv options, or by using the ansible-playbook option --start-at-task to start execution from a specific task for testing.

What is diff mode?
Diff mode in Ansible shows the differences between the current state of managed nodes and the desired state defined in your playbook without making any changes. It helps you understand the impact of your playbook before applying changes.

What is Dry Run in Ansible, and how to do that?
A dry run in Ansible involves simulating playbook execution without actually making any changes to the managed nodes. You can perform a dry run by using the --check or --diff options with ansible-playbook.

What are pre-tasks and post-tasks?
Pre-tasks and post-tasks in Ansible are tasks that are executed before and after the main tasks of a playbook. They can be used for setup or cleanup operations.

How can you run all tasks at once in Ansible?
You can run all tasks at once in Ansible by not specifying any tags when executing the playbook. This ensures that all tasks are executed without filtering based on tags.

What is a block in Ansible?
A block in Ansible allows you to group multiple tasks together and apply common control options, like ignore_errors, to the entire block. It provides a way to structure tasks and apply settings collectively.

What are the different variable scopes?
Variable scopes in Ansible include:

Local scope: Variables defined within a task.
Host scope: Variables specific to a host or host group.
Group scope:
How variable precedence takes place?
Variable precedence in Ansible is determined by several factors, and variables can be overridden or inherited in the following order:

Role Default Variables: Variables defined in the defaults/main.yml file of a role.
Inventory Variables: Variables defined in the inventory file, host_vars, or group_vars.
Playbook Variables: Variables defined within a playbook.
Extra Variables: Variables provided using the -e command-line option.
Roles: Variables defined in roles that are applied in the playbook.
Environment Variables: Variables defined in the environment.
When there are conflicts, Ansible follows a priority order, with variables defined later in the order taking precedence over earlier ones. However, variables defined in tasks using set_fact always have the highest precedence.

Difference between include & import?

Include: The include statement allows you to include other Ansible playbooks or tasks dynamically. It is used when you want to reuse existing playbooks or tasks within your playbook. Included files are evaluated at runtime.

Import: The import statement is used to embed the content of other Ansible playbooks or roles directly into the playbook during playbook parsing. Imported content becomes part of the main playbook, and the order of execution is determined during playbook parsing.

How to include custom modules in Ansible?
To include custom modules in Ansible, you can place the custom module Python script in one of the following locations:

/usr/share/ansible/plugins/modules/ (system-wide location)
~/.ansible/plugins/modules/ (user-specific location)
Ensure the script has executable permissions. You can then use the custom module like any other Ansible module in your playbooks.

Describe the role directory structure?
A typical Ansible role directory structure consists of the following directories and files:

css
Copy code
my_role/
├── defaults/
│   └── main.yml
├── files/
│   └── (static files)
├── handlers/
│   └── main.yml
├── meta/
│   └── main.yml
├── tasks/
│   └── main.yml
├── templates/
│   └── (Jinja2 templates)
├── vars/
│   └── main.yml
└── README.md
defaults: Contains default variables for the role.
files: Stores static files that can be copied to remote hosts.
handlers: Contains handler tasks that respond to events triggered by other tasks.
meta: Provides metadata about the role, such as role dependencies.
tasks: Contains the main tasks that the role performs.
templates: Contains Jinja2 templates used by the role.
vars: Stores variables specific to the role.
README.md: Documentation explaining the purpose and usage of the role.
This directory structure organizes the role's components and makes it easy to reuse and share roles with others in Ansible.

------------------------------
 Dockers & Containers
------------------------------

What is Docker?
Docker is a platform for developing, shipping, and running applications in containers. Containers are lightweight, portable, and self-sufficient units that encapsulate an application and its dependencies, ensuring consistent behavior across different environments.

Difference between container and VMs?

Containers: Containers share the host OS kernel and are more lightweight. They start quickly, have lower overhead, and are ideal for running microservices.
VMs (Virtual Machines): VMs emulate a complete operating system and run on a hypervisor. They are larger, slower to start, and consume more resources but provide stronger isolation.
Difference between Docker and Virtualization?

Docker: Docker uses containerization technology to package applications and dependencies together in isolated containers. It shares the host OS kernel, making it lightweight and efficient.
Virtualization: Virtualization involves running multiple virtual machines (VMs) on a hypervisor, each with its own OS instance. It consumes more resources and is slower to start but provides stronger isolation.
Difference between container and image?

Container: A container is a runnable instance of an image. It includes the application and its runtime environment. Containers are isolated and can communicate with the host OS and other containers.
Image: An image is a lightweight, standalone, and executable package that includes the application and its dependencies. Images are used to create containers.
How does an image build?
An image is built from a set of instructions defined in a Dockerfile. The Dockerfile specifies the base image, application code, dependencies, and configurations. Docker builds the image by executing these instructions, resulting in a layered image.

What are image layers?
Image layers are intermediate read-only filesystems used to build Docker images. Each instruction in a Dockerfile creates a new layer. Layers are cached, and when an image is modified, only the affected layers need to be rebuilt.

How do image layers work?
Image layers are stacked on top of each other, with each layer containing a set of file changes. The layers are read-only, and when you run a container, a new, writable layer (the container layer) is added on top. This allows for efficient sharing of common layers among multiple images and containers.

What is overlayfs?
OverlayFS is a union filesystem used by Docker to combine multiple image layers into a single view. It allows changes to be made in a container without modifying the underlying image layers. OverlayFS is a copy-on-write filesystem, ensuring minimal disk space usage.

Where can image layers be found in which directory?
Image layers are stored in the /var/lib/docker/overlay2 directory on the host system.

How can we check the content of each layer?
You can use the docker history <image_name> command to view the history of image layers. Each layer will display the command used to create it.

How to check the layers stacked with an image?
You can use the docker image inspect <image_name> command to view detailed information about an image, including its layers.

What is Union Mount & AUFS?
Union mount is a file system feature that allows multiple directories to be mounted together as one. AUFS (Advanced Multi-Layered Unification Filesystem) is a specific union filesystem used by Docker in earlier versions to manage image layers and container filesystems. Overlay2 is now the default filesystem driver in Docker.

Why use the Union mount system for Docker?
Union filesystems like Overlay2 provide efficient layering and copy-on-write capabilities, reducing storage requirements and speeding up container creation. They allow containers to share common layers, minimizing disk space usage.

What are the 3 different directories in /var/lib/docker/aufs?
In Docker's earlier versions using AUFS, /var/lib/docker/aufs contained three directories:

diff: Contains the writable layer for each container.
layers: Contains the information about the layers that make up images.
mnt: Mount point for the containers, where the layered filesystem is mounted.
How to run an image?
You can run an image as a container using the docker run command followed by the image name. For example: docker run <image_name>.

How to tag an image?
You can tag an image using the docker tag command, specifying the image ID or name and the new tag name. For example: docker tag <image_id> <new_tag>.

How to link one container with another?
Docker has deprecated the use of container links in favor of user-defined networks. You can create a custom network using docker network create and then use the --network option when running containers to connect them to the same network.

How do you sequence the containers? A first, then B should execute after that?
You can sequence containers using dependencies and orchestration tools like Docker Compose or Kubernetes. In Docker Compose, you can define container dependencies within the docker-compose.yml file using the depends_on keyword.

How to create a volume in a Docker container to store data?
You can create a volume when running a container using the -v or --volume option. For example: docker run -v <host_path>:<container_path> <image_name>.

How to mount a local directory into a container?
You can mount a local directory into a container using the -v or --volume option. For example: docker run -v /local_path:/container_path <image_name>.

How to expose a port number to access a container?
You can expose a port from a container using the -p or --publish option when running the container. For example: docker run -p <host_port>:<container_port> <image_name>.

What is entrypoint in Docker?
Entrypoint in Docker is an instruction in a Dockerfile that specifies the default command to run when a container is started. It sets the executable that will be executed when the container starts.

What is a Dockerfile?
A Dockerfile is a text file that contains a set of instructions for building a Docker image. It specifies the base image, application code, dependencies, and configuration settings.

Difference between ADD & COPY parameters in Dockerfile?

ADD can copy files from the local filesystem or URLs and can extract compressed files. It has more features but can be less predictable.
COPY is used for straightforward file copying from the local filesystem to the image. It is recommended for most use cases as it's more predictable.
How to create a bridge in a container?
You can create a bridge network in Docker using the docker network create command, which will create a new bridge network.

How does a container get an internal IP?
A container gets an internal IP address assigned by the Docker daemon when it is connected to a network. The IP address is typically allocated from the subnet associated with the network.

Can we check the process of a container inside as well as outside the container?
Yes, you can check the processes running inside a container using docker exec or by running commands within the container's shell. To view the processes from the host system, you can use tools like docker top or inspect the container using docker inspect.

Can we check the container process on the Docker host?
Yes, you can use tools like docker top or inspect commands to check the processes of a running container on the Docker host.

How does the kernel isolate to run the container, and how are resources managed by the kernel?
The kernel isolates containers using namespaces and controls resource allocation using cgroups (control groups). Namespaces isolate various aspects of a container, such as its filesystem, network, and process space. Cgroups limit the container's access to system resources like CPU, memory, and disk.

What is namespace and cgroups?

Namespace: Namespaces are a Linux kernel feature that isolates various aspects of a container, including its process, network, filesystem, and more. Each namespace provides an isolated view of a specific resource, allowing multiple containers to run on the same host without interference.
Cgroups (Control Groups): Cgroups are a kernel feature for managing and limiting resource usage by processes and containers. They control and allocate CPU, memory, disk I/O, and other resources to ensure fair resource sharing among containers.
What is Docker Compose and Docker Swarm?

Docker Compose: Docker Compose is a tool for defining and running multi-container Docker applications. It uses a YAML file (docker-compose.yml) to specify the services, networks, and volumes for an application.
Docker Swarm: Docker Swarm is a native clustering and orchestration solution for Docker. It enables you to create and manage a swarm of Docker nodes, making it easier to deploy and scale containerized applications.
How can you give a different network IP to the container?
You can assign a specific IP address to a container by creating a user-defined bridge network (docker network create) and then specifying the --ip option when running the container with docker run.

What are the parameters of a Dockerfile?
Common parameters in a Dockerfile include:

FROM: Specifies the base image.
LABEL: Adds metadata to the image.
RUN: Executes commands during the image build.
COPY/ADD: Copies files and directories into the image.
WORKDIR: Sets the working directory for subsequent instructions.
EXPOSE: Defines which ports the container listens on.
CMD/ENTRYPOINT: Specifies the command to run when the container starts.
Is there any Windows container available?
Yes, Docker supports Windows containers in addition to Linux containers. You can run Windows-based applications in Windows containers using Docker.

How to stop a container?
You can stop a running container using the docker stop command followed by the container's name or ID. For example: docker stop <container_name_or_id>.

How to run a container in the background?
You can run a container in the background (detached mode) by adding the -d or --detach option to the docker run command. For example: docker run -d <image_name>.

How to go inside a container if the container is running in the background?
You can go inside a running container by using the docker exec -it <container_name_or_id> /bin/bash command, which opens an interactive shell session inside the container.

How to check running containers?
You can check the list of running containers using the docker ps command. To view all containers, including stopped ones, use docker ps -a.

How to remove an image?
You can remove an image using the docker rmi command followed by the image name or ID. For example: docker rmi <image_name_or_id>.

How to run an image that is in tar format?
To run an image in tar format, you can use the docker load command to load the image from the tarball, and then you can run it with docker run. For example:


docker load -i <image_tar_file>
docker run <image_name>
Command to check the process of a container?
You can check the processes running inside a container using docker top <container_name_or_id>.

How to check resource utilization of a container?
You can check the resource utilization of a container, including CPU, memory, and network usage, using the docker stats <container_name_or_id> command.

How to create an image?
You can create an image by defining a Dockerfile that specifies the image's base, application, and dependencies. Afterward, you can build the image using the docker build command. For example:

docker build -t <image_name> .

How to save changes of a container?
You can save the changes made to a container as a new image using the docker commit command. For example:
docker commit <container_name_or_id> <new_image_name>

What are registries?
Registries are repositories for Docker images. They store and distribute Docker images, making them available for download and use by others. Docker Hub is a popular public registry, but you can also use private registries for storing and sharing images within your organization.

Difference between Docker commands: up, run, and start?

docker up: There is no standard up command in Docker. It might refer to bringing up containers defined in a Docker Compose file using docker-compose up.
docker run: Used to create and start a new container from an image.
docker start: Used to start an existing stopped container. It does not create a new container instance.

Can we run more than one process in a container?
Docker containers are typically designed to run a single main process. However, you can run multiple processes inside a container by using tools like supervisord or by designing your application to run multiple processes as child processes.

How to remove a particular layer from a container?
You cannot remove a specific layer from a container once it has been built. Container images are immutable, and layers are integral to the image. You can only remove an entire image or container.

Give me a command to remove all exited containers?
You can remove all exited containers using the following command:

docker rm $(docker ps -q -f status=exited)

--------------------------------------
kuberntes
----------------------------------------

What is Openshift?
OpenShift is a container orchestration platform developed by Red Hat. It provides a comprehensive platform for building, deploying, and managing containerized applications and services. OpenShift is based on Kubernetes and adds additional features for enterprise use cases, including developer and operational tools.

Difference between Openshift & Kubernetes?

OpenShift: OpenShift is a container platform that extends Kubernetes with additional features such as integrated developer tools, security, and multi-tenancy support. It is often seen as an enterprise-ready Kubernetes distribution.
Kubernetes: Kubernetes is an open-source container orchestration platform for automating the deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications. It provides a foundation for container orchestration but lacks some of the enterprise-specific features found in OpenShift.
What is Services Layer?
In the context of OpenShift, the Services Layer refers to the part of the platform that manages networking and service discovery for applications. It enables communication between different components of an application, load balancing, and discovery of services within the cluster.

How to expose a service in Openshift?
You can expose a service in OpenShift by creating a route. A route exposes a service externally, allowing it to be accessed from outside the cluster. You can create a route using the oc expose service <service_name> command.

What are the three components of any created project?
In OpenShift, when you create a project (also known as a namespace in Kubernetes), it typically includes three components:

Project: The logical boundary or namespace where resources are created and managed.
Service Account: An identity associated with the project, used for controlling access to resources within the project.
Role Binding: A binding between a role and a user or group, defining the permissions and access level for resources within the project.
What is a router in the default or any project while creating a project?
In OpenShift, a router is a component that handles incoming requests to routes and forwards them to the appropriate services in a project. Routers are automatically deployed when you create a project to enable external access to services within the project.

What do you mean by identity provider in Openshift?
An identity provider (IdP) in OpenShift is an external system or service that authenticates users and provides identity information. It allows OpenShift to integrate with various authentication sources, such as LDAP, Active Directory, or OAuth, to verify user identities.

How do you create a new user identity?
User identities in OpenShift can be created and managed through the chosen identity provider (IdP). Depending on the IdP, you may create user identities manually or configure synchronization with an external authentication source.

Where is the user identity located?
User identities are typically stored and managed in the identity provider (IdP) system. OpenShift integrates with the IdP to authenticate users and retrieve identity information.

What is a project in OpenShift?
A project in OpenShift (equivalent to a Kubernetes namespace) is a logical boundary that isolates and organizes resources. It provides a way to group related applications, services, and other resources, along with associated policies and access controls.

What are the types of permissions/role bindings in OpenShift?
OpenShift uses Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) to manage permissions. The types of permissions and role bindings include:

Roles: Define a set of permissions for resources within a project.
ClusterRoles: Define permissions across all projects in the cluster.
RoleBindings: Associate roles with users, service accounts, or groups within a project.
ClusterRoleBindings: Associate cluster roles with users, service accounts, or groups at the cluster level.
How to check the permissions of a user?
You can check a user's permissions by examining the role bindings associated with their account using the oc describe user <username> or oc describe serviceaccount <serviceaccountname> command.

How to describe anything in OpenShift?
You can describe resources in OpenShift using the oc describe command followed by the resource type and name. For example: oc describe pod <pod_name>.

How to check the number of projects?
You can check the number of projects in OpenShift using the oc get projects command.

How to assign a role/permission to a user?
To assign a role or permission to a user in OpenShift, you can create a role binding that associates a role with the user's identity using the oc create rolebinding command.

What is ClusterRoleBinding in OpenShift?
A ClusterRoleBinding in OpenShift associates a cluster-wide role (ClusterRole) with a user, group, or service account. It grants permissions at the cluster level, meaning the associated role applies across all projects in the cluster.

What is the process/working of POD creation?
When a pod is created in OpenShift, the following happens:

A request is made to create a pod with specific specifications.
OpenShift's Kubernetes-based scheduler selects a suitable node (worker) to run the pod.
The container runtime (e.g., Docker) on the selected node pulls the specified container image.
The container is started within the pod on the selected node.
What is Builder POD?
A Builder Pod in OpenShift is a specialized pod used for building and packaging applications from source code. It typically includes build tools and dependencies required to compile and package applications.

What is Deployer POD?
A Deployer Pod in OpenShift is used during the deployment process to manage application deployments, updates, and rollbacks. It ensures that new versions of applications are deployed and maintained correctly.

How to create a new application POD?
To create a new application pod in OpenShift, you define the pod's specifications in a YAML or JSON file and use the oc create -f <pod_file> command to create it.

How to check logs of a POD?
You can check the logs of a pod in
OpenShift using the oc logs <pod_name> command. This command allows you to view the logs of the specified pod.

What is Deployment Configuration (DC), and why do we need DC?
A Deployment Configuration (DC) in OpenShift is a resource that defines how an application should be deployed, including the desired number of replicas, triggers for scaling, and update strategies. DCs ensure that application deployments are automated, monitored, and can be easily rolled back if issues arise.

What is SVC (Service), and why do we need SVC?
A Service (SVC) in OpenShift is a resource that provides a stable endpoint for accessing a set of pods. It enables load balancing and service discovery within the cluster. SVCs are needed to expose and make pods accessible to other components of the application or external clients.

What is RC (Replication Controller)?
A Replication Controller (RC) in OpenShift is a deprecated resource used for managing the desired number of pod replicas. It ensures that a specified number of pod replicas are running at all times, replacing pods if they fail or are terminated.

How to check Deployment Configuration (DC) of a pod, and how to edit DC?
You can check the Deployment Configuration of a pod using the oc get dc command. To edit a DC, you can use the oc edit dc <dc_name> command. This opens the DC configuration in your default text editor, allowing you to make changes.

How to create a route?
You can create a route in OpenShift using the oc expose svc <service_name> command, which creates a route associated with a service. A route exposes the service externally, allowing access to the application from outside the cluster.

How to expose a service (SVC)?
You can expose a service in OpenShift by creating a route for it using the oc expose svc <service_name> command. This command creates an externally accessible URL for the service.

How to do a rollout?
To perform a rollout in OpenShift, you can update the Deployment Configuration (DC) with a new version of your application. OpenShift will automatically handle the rollout, creating new pods with the updated application version and terminating old ones. You can monitor the rollout's progress using the OpenShift web console or command-line tools.

How to increase the replica count?
You can increase the replica count for a Deployment Configuration (DC) in OpenShift by using the oc scale dc <dc_name> --replicas=<new_replica_count> command. This scales up the number of pods for the specified DC.

What is Source-to-Image in OpenShift?
Source-to-Image (S2I) is a framework in OpenShift for building container images from source code automatically. It simplifies the process of building and deploying applications by using predefined builder images and templates.

What is a builder image?
A builder image in OpenShift is a container image that contains the necessary tools and runtime for building applications from source code. Builder images are used in the Source-to-Image (S2I) process to create final application images.

What are the processes to create Source-to-Image (S2I)?
Creating an S2I build in OpenShift typically involves the following steps:

Define an S2I builder image or use a predefined one.
Create a build configuration (oc new-build) and specify the source code location.
Start the build (oc start-build), which triggers the S2I process.
The builder image compiles and packages the source code into a new application image.
Deploy the application using the new image.
How to give ClusterRole/permission to the user?
To assign a ClusterRole or cluster-wide permission to a user in OpenShift, you can create a ClusterRoleBinding that associates the ClusterRole with the user's identity. Use the oc create clusterrolebinding command to do this.

How to create a secure route?
To create a secure route in OpenShift, you can use the --secure option with the oc expose svc command when creating a route. This ensures that traffic to the route is secured using TLS/SSL encryption.

What is PV (Persistent Volume) and PVC (Persistent Volume Claim)?

PV (Persistent Volume): A PV in OpenShift is a piece of network-attached storage with a specific capacity that can be dynamically provisioned by an administrator or statically created. PVs can be shared across pods.
PVC (Persistent Volume Claim): A PVC is a request for storage resources by a pod. It specifies the desired storage capacity and access mode. Pods can claim PVs by referencing PVCs.
What are access modes in PV?
PVs in OpenShift have three access modes:

ReadWriteOnce (RWO): The volume can be mounted as read-write by a single node.
ReadOnlyMany (ROX): The volume can be mounted as read-only by multiple nodes.
ReadWriteMany (RWX): The volume can be mounted as read-write by multiple nodes.
What is node selector?
Node Selector in OpenShift is a feature that allows you to constrain the pods that can be scheduled to nodes based on labels assigned to nodes. It is used to ensure that specific pods are deployed to nodes with particular characteristics.

What are the two regions in projects?
In OpenShift projects, there are typically two regions:

Infrastructure Region: This region includes resources required for running OpenShift itself, such as routers and registry services.
Application Region: This region is where you deploy and manage your application workloads.
Difference between template & Deployment Configuration?

Template: A template in OpenShift is a blueprint that defines a set of resources, including DCs, SVCs, and routes, that can be used to create multiple instances of an application or environment.
Deployment Configuration (DC): A DC defines how an application should be deployed and updated, including the desired number of replicas, triggers, and strategies for scaling and rolling out updates.
How to migrate the whole cluster to another?
Migrating the whole OpenShift cluster to another environment involves a complex set of tasks, including data migration, configuration transfer, and DNS updates. The exact process depends on the specific deployment and infrastructure. It typically requires careful planning and coordination with the OpenShift administrators.

How to manually migrate a container?
Manually migrating a container usually involves stopping the container on the source system, exporting its data, copying it to the destination system, and then importing and starting it again. The exact steps depend on the container runtime being used (e.g., Docker).


--------------------------------------

aws

--------------------------------------------

What is Amazon RDS?
Amazon RDS (Relational Database Service) is a managed database service provided by AWS. It makes it easy to set up, operate, and scale relational databases like MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, SQL Server, and MariaDB in the cloud. RDS handles routine database tasks such as provisioning, patching, backup, recovery, and scaling, allowing users to focus on their application development rather than database management.

What is EC2, S3, and EBS?

EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud): EC2 is a web service that provides resizable compute capacity in the cloud. It allows users to launch and manage virtual machines (EC2 instances) on AWS infrastructure, providing the flexibility to scale compute resources as needed.
S3 (Simple Storage Service): S3 is an object storage service that offers scalable and durable storage for storing and retrieving data. It is commonly used for backup, data archiving, web hosting, and content distribution.
EBS (Elastic Block Store): EBS is a block storage service that provides durable, high-performance block-level storage volumes that can be attached to EC2 instances. EBS volumes are used for storing data that requires persistence, such as operating system volumes and database storage.
What is VPC, and why do we require creating VPC?
VPC (Virtual Private Cloud) is a network isolation technology provided by AWS. It allows users to create logically isolated sections of the AWS Cloud where they can launch resources like EC2 instances, databases, and more. VPCs provide control over network configurations, security, and routing. You require creating VPCs to isolate your resources, define network access controls, and establish private network connectivity.

Is it possible to scale an EC2 Instance vertically?
Yes, it is possible to scale an EC2 instance vertically by resizing the instance type. Vertical scaling involves changing the instance type to one with more CPU, memory, or other resources. This can be done manually by stopping the instance, changing the instance type, and starting it again. AWS also offers auto-scaling groups for horizontal scaling.

How is Amazon RDS, Redshift, and DynamoDB different?

Amazon RDS: RDS is a managed relational database service that is suitable for traditional relational databases like MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, SQL Server, and MariaDB.
Amazon Redshift: Redshift is a managed data warehousing service that is optimized for analytical querying and reporting on large datasets. It is based on a columnar storage format and is designed for data warehousing workloads.
Amazon DynamoDB: DynamoDB is a managed NoSQL database service that is designed for high scalability, low-latency, and flexible data models. It is suitable for applications that require fast and predictable performance with automatic scaling.
How is a Spot Instance different from an On-demand Instance?

On-Demand Instance: On-Demand instances are EC2 instances that you can provision and run without any upfront payment. You pay for these instances by the hour or second, depending on the instance type, without any long-term commitment.
Spot Instance: Spot Instances are spare EC2 capacity offered at a significantly lower cost compared to On-Demand instances. However, they can be terminated by AWS if the capacity is needed for On-Demand instances. Spot Instances are suitable for workloads that can tolerate interruptions.
How is Infrastructure As Code processed and executed in AWS?
Infrastructure as Code (IAC) in AWS is typically implemented using tools like AWS CloudFormation or Terraform. IAC templates define the desired infrastructure resources and configurations. When you deploy or update an IAC template, the tool translates the template into AWS API calls to create or modify resources, ensuring the desired infrastructure state.

If your Linux-based server is slowing down, what will you do to check?
To diagnose and address a slow Linux server, you can:

Check system resource utilization (CPU, memory, disk, network).
Identify and analyze resource-intensive processes using tools like top or htop.
Examine system logs for errors or unusual events.
Monitor disk space and I/O activity.
Check for network bottlenecks or issues.
Review application logs and performance metrics.
Perform performance tuning and optimization based on findings.
Types of EBS storage?
EBS provides several types of storage volumes, including:

General Purpose (SSD): Suitable for a broad range of workloads, offering a balance of price and performance.
Provisioned IOPS (SSD): Designed for I/O-intensive workloads, with guaranteed IOPS (Input/Output Operations Per Second).
Throughput Optimized (HDD): Designed for frequently accessed, large datasets, providing low-cost throughput.
Cold HDD: Designed for less frequently accessed, infrequently changed data, offering a low-cost storage option.
How to back up a running EC2 instance?
You can create a backup (AMI - Amazon Machine Image) of a running EC2 instance using the AWS Management Console, AWS CLI, or SDKs. The general steps involve selecting the instance, choosing "Create Image," specifying the image details, and initiating the backup. This process creates a snapshot of the instance's root volume.

How to secure an S3 bucket?
To secure an S3 bucket, you can implement various security measures, including:

Setting bucket policies and access control lists (ACLs).
Enforcing encryption at rest using AWS KMS or S3-managed keys.
Implementing IAM policies to control access to the bucket.
Using S3 bucket versioning for data protection.
Monitoring and logging bucket activity using Amazon S3 Access Logs and CloudWatch.
Implementing S3 bucket policies for fine-grained access control.
Ensuring public access is restricted, and using "Block Public Access" settings.
What are the security options available for users to access S3?
Users can access S3 securely by using Identity and Access Management (IAM) roles and policies, bucket policies, and access control lists (ACLs). These mechanisms allow fine-grained control over who can access S3 buckets and what actions they can perform.

How to create an AMI (Amazon Machine Image)?
You can create an AMI from an EC2 instance using the AWS Management Console, AWS CLI, or SDKs. The process typically involves selecting the instance, choosing "Create Image," specifying image details, and starting the AMI creation process. Once created, you can use the AMI to launch new EC2 instances with the same configuration as the source instance.

What are the main components of CloudFormation?
The main components of AWS CloudFormation are:

Template: A JSON or YAML file that defines the AWS resources and their configurations.
Stack: A collection of AWS resources created and managed as a single unit.
Stack Set: Allows you to create stacks across multiple accounts and regions.
Change Set: A summary of proposed changes before executing them in a stack.
Parameter: Values that you can pass to a template at runtime.
Output: Values that are returned by the template.
Resource: An AWS resource declared in the template.
Mapping: Key-value pairs that can be referenced in the template.
What is mapping in a CloudFormation template?
Mappings in a CloudFormation template are key-value pairs that allow you to create reusable templates by specifying different values based on a key. Mappings are often used to define region-specific values or to make templates more flexible and adaptable.

How is YAML different from JSON?
YAML (YAML Ain't Markup Language) and JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) are both data interchange formats, but they have differences:

YAML is more human-readable and has a simpler syntax compared to JSON.
YAML uses indentation for nesting, while JSON uses curly braces and square brackets.
YAML is commonly used for configuration files and data serialization, while JSON is used for data interchange between systems.
JSON is a subset of JavaScript, making it suitable for use in programming languages, whereas YAML has no programming constructs.
Different types of ELB (Elastic Load Balancer)?
AWS Elastic Load Balancing (ELB) offers three types of load balancers:

Application Load Balancer (ALB): Routes traffic based on HTTP/HTTPS protocol and operates at the application layer. Suitable for modern web applications with multiple services.
Network Load Balancer (NLB): Routes traffic based on TCP/UDP protocol at the transport layer. Provides ultra-high performance and low latency.
Classic Load Balancer (CLB): The original AWS load balancer that routes traffic based on protocols and ports. Being phased out in favor of ALB and NLB.
What is an Auto Scaling group?
An Auto Scaling group in AWS allows you to automatically adjust the number of EC2 instances in a fleet based on defined criteria. It helps ensure that the desired number of instances are running to handle changes in application demand, improving availability and cost optimization.

Which type of ELB is good for application load?
The Application Load Balancer (ALB) is well-suited for handling application load as it operates at the application layer and supports content-based routing, host-based routing, and path-based routing for HTTP and HTTPS traffic. ALB is commonly used for modern web applications and microservices architectures.

What is the difference between an Application Load Balancer and a Classic Load Balancer?
The main differences between an Application Load Balancer (ALB) and a Classic Load Balancer (CLB) include:

Layer: ALB operates at the application layer (Layer 7) and is used for HTTP/HTTPS traffic, while CLB operates at the transport layer (Layer 4) and supports various protocols.
Content-Based Routing: ALB supports content-based routing based on URL path, host, and other HTTP attributes, while CLB routes traffic based on ports.
Target Groups: ALB uses target groups for routing requests to specific instances, while CLB uses Elastic Load Balancer instances.
WebSockets: ALB supports WebSockets for real-time communication, while CLB does not.
Path-Based Routing: ALB allows routing based on URL paths, while CLB does not provide native support for this.
What is Metrics in CloudWatch?
In Amazon CloudWatch, metrics are time-ordered data points representing the values of a resource's performance over time. Metrics are used to monitor and visualize the operational health and performance of AWS resources and applications.

Is it possible to recover your lost private key?
No, it is not possible to recover a lost private key. Private keys are used for secure access, and losing them means you will no longer be able to access resources or decrypt data encrypted with the corresponding public key. It is important to securely manage and back up private keys.

How can you connect to your EC2 instance if you lost your key?
If you lose access to an EC2 instance because of a lost key pair, you typically have the following options:

Use an IAM role: If the instance has an associated IAM role, you can create a new key pair and attach it to the role. Then, stop the instance and modify the instance profile to use the new role/key pair.
Use a custom AMI: Create a custom AMI of the instance, associate it with a new key pair, and launch a new instance from the AMI.
Use EC2 Rescue Mode: AWS offers a "Rescue Mode" feature for Linux instances that allows you to access the instance's file system even if you lost the key. This can help you recover data.
While connecting to your EC2 instances, what are the possible connection issues one might face?
When connecting to EC2 instances, you may encounter various issues, including:

Incorrect SSH key or credentials.
Security group rules preventing access.
Network or firewall issues.
SSH daemon not running on the instance.
Instance is in a private subnet without proper access.
Instance is not responding or is unreachable.
Key pair mismatch.
Authentication failures.
What is a Subnet, and how many subnets are there in a VPC?
A subnet in a VPC (Virtual Private Cloud) is a range of IP addresses in your VPC's IP address range. Subnets allow you to partition your VPC's IP address space into smaller segments for better network isolation and routing control. The number of subnets you can create in a VPC depends on the VPC's IP address range and the CIDR blocks assigned to the subnets.

Why do we make subnets?
Subnets are created to achieve the following goals:

Network Isolation: Subnets provide network isolation, allowing you to segment resources and control traffic flow.
Routing Control: Subnets enable you to route traffic differently based on the destination.
Security: Subnets can have associated security groups and network access control lists (ACLs) to control inbound and outbound traffic.
Resource Placement: Subnets help distribute resources across availability zones and provide high availability.
What is a routing table?
A routing table in a VPC contains a set of rules (routes) that determine how network traffic is directed within the VPC and to external destinations. Each subnet in a VPC is associated with a routing table, and the routing table defines the path for traffic leaving or entering the subnet.

How can you connect a private subnet with a public subnet?
To connect a private subnet with a public subnet in a VPC, you can set up a network address translation (NAT) gateway or NAT instance in the public subnet. This allows instances in the private subnet to initiate outbound connections to the internet or other resources while keeping them hidden behind the NAT device.

Can VPC peering be possible in two different regions?
No, VPC peering is not possible between VPCs located in different AWS regions. VPC peering is limited to VPCs within the same AWS region. If you need to connect VPCs in different regions, you can use other methods such as VPN connections or Direct Connect.

---------------------------------------------------

ci/cd

---------------------------------------------------

What is CI & CD?

CI (Continuous Integration): CI is a software development practice in which code changes are automatically built, tested, and integrated into the shared codebase frequently. It ensures that code changes do not introduce integration issues, and it promotes collaboration among developers.
CD (Continuous Delivery/Continuous Deployment): CD is a software engineering approach that extends CI. It automates the delivery and deployment of code changes to production or staging environments. Continuous Delivery focuses on delivering changes to a staging environment for manual approval, while Continuous Deployment automatically deploys code changes to production after passing tests.
What is a CI/CD pipeline?
A CI/CD pipeline is a set of automated processes and tools that facilitate the building, testing, and deployment of code changes. It consists of various stages, such as code integration, automated testing, artifact generation, and deployment. A well-structured CI/CD pipeline streamlines software development and delivery by automating repetitive tasks and ensuring code quality.

Difference between Continuous Delivery & Deployment?

Continuous Delivery (CD): In Continuous Delivery, code changes are automatically built, tested, and deployed to a staging environment for further manual testing and validation. The deployment to production is a separate, manual step. CD ensures that code changes are always in a deployable state and ready for release but leaves the decision to deploy to production in the hands of the team.

Continuous Deployment (CD): Continuous Deployment takes automation one step further. In this approach, code changes that pass automated tests are automatically deployed to the production environment without manual intervention. It aims to release code changes to production as quickly as possible once they are validated by automated tests.

List of important tools & technologies used in DevOps:
DevOps involves a wide range of tools and technologies to support various stages of the software development and delivery lifecycle. Some important DevOps tools and technologies include:

Source Code Management (SCM):

Git
GitHub
GitLab
Bitbucket
Continuous Integration (CI):

Jenkins
Travis CI
CircleCI
GitLab CI/CD
Continuous Deployment/Continuous Delivery (CD/CD):

Ansible
Puppet
Chef
Terraform
Containerization and Orchestration:

Docker
Kubernetes
Amazon ECS
Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)
Artifact Repository:

Nexus Repository
JFrog Artifactory
AWS S3
Infrastructure as Code (IAC):

AWS CloudFormation
Terraform
Azure Resource Manager (ARM) Templates
Monitoring and Logging:

Prometheus
Grafana
ELK Stack (Elasticsearch, Logstash, Kibana)
New Relic
Collaboration and Communication:

Slack
Microsoft Teams
Mattermost
Discord
Testing and Quality Assurance:

Selenium
JUnit
TestNG
JIRA
Security and Compliance:

OWASP tools
SonarQube
HashiCorp Vault
AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM)
Deployment and Release Management:

Spinnaker
AWS CodeDeploy
Jenkins X
ArgoCD
Cloud Providers:

Amazon Web Services (AWS)
Microsoft Azure
Google Cloud Platform (GCP)
IBM Cloud
These tools and technologies enable DevOps teams to automate tasks, improve collaboration, and accelerate the development and delivery of software products. The specific tools used may vary depending on the organization's needs and preferences.

-------------------
linux

-----------------=----




That's a comprehensive list of Linux-related questions! Answering all of them would be quite extensive, so I'll provide brief answers to each of your questions. If you need more detailed explanations on any specific topic, please feel free to ask.

What is Linux?
Linux is an open-source Unix-like operating system kernel that forms the core of various Linux distributions (Linux-based operating systems). It was developed by Linus Torvalds and is widely used for servers, desktops, embedded systems, and more.

What are Linux OS Flavors?
Linux distributions, also known as "flavors," are different variations of the Linux operating system. Examples include Ubuntu, CentOS, Debian, Fedora, Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL), and many more.

Difference between Debian & RPM based OS?
Debian and RPM-based systems differ in the package management format they use. Debian-based systems use DEB packages and the APT package manager, while RPM-based systems use RPM packages and tools like YUM or DNF. Popular Debian-based distributions include Ubuntu, and RPM-based distributions include CentOS and Fedora.

What is Kernel?
The kernel is the core component of the operating system that manages hardware resources, provides essential services, and acts as an intermediary between software applications and hardware.

Explain the boot process of Linux OS?
The Linux boot process involves several stages, including BIOS/UEFI initialization, bootloader (e.g., GRUB) loading the kernel, kernel initialization, init or systemd starting user-space services, and finally, the user login.

How is RHEL different from CentOS?
CentOS is a free, community-driven distribution based on the source code of Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL). RHEL is a commercially supported distribution with additional features, support, and certifications. CentOS is often used as a free alternative to RHEL.

What is the Latest version of RHEL?
As of my knowledge cutoff date in September 2021, the latest version of Red Hat Enterprise Linux was RHEL 8.4. Please check the official Red Hat website for the most up-to-date information.

What is Grub?
GRUB (GRand Unified Bootloader) is a popular boot loader used in many Linux distributions. It allows users to select and boot from different operating systems and kernel versions on the same system.

Difference between Grub & Grub2?
GRUB2 is the successor to the original GRUB. It offers more advanced features, support for multiple platforms, and improved configuration options compared to the original GRUB.

What is a boot loader?
A boot loader is a program or software component that loads the operating system into memory during the boot process. It allows users to select the operating system or kernel they want to boot.

Do you think the boot process in RHEL 7 is faster than RHEL 6? If yes, How?
The boot process speed can vary based on various factors, including hardware and system configuration. RHEL 7 introduced systemd, which is designed to optimize system startup and parallelize service initialization, potentially making the boot process faster than in RHEL 6.

What is .rpm & .deb?

.rpm: RPM (Red Hat Package Manager) is a package format used by RPM-based Linux distributions like Red Hat, CentOS, and Fedora.
.deb: DEB is a package format used by Debian-based Linux distributions like Debian and Ubuntu.
What is RPM?
RPM stands for "Red Hat Package Manager." It is both a package format and a package management tool used for installing, updating, and managing software packages on RPM-based Linux distributions.

What is YUM?
YUM (Yellowdog Updater, Modified) is a package management utility used on RPM-based Linux distributions. It allows users to install, update, and manage software packages and their dependencies.

Different methods to install RPM-based packages?
RPM-based packages can be installed using package management tools like yum or dnf (for modern systems), manually using the rpm command, or by using graphical package management tools.

What is Bash?
Bash (Bourne-Again Shell) is a popular Unix shell and command-line interface used in Linux and Unix-like systems. It provides a command-line environment for interacting with the operating system.

What is a Shell?
A shell is a command-line interface that allows users to interact with the operating system by entering commands. It interprets and executes user commands.

How many types of Shells are there?
There are various shells available for Unix-like operating systems, including Bash, sh (Bourne Shell), csh (C Shell), ksh (Korn Shell), and more.

Explain the daily used basic commands like cp, mv, rm?

cp: Used to copy files or directories.
mv: Used to move (rename) files or directories.
rm: Used to remove (delete) files or directories.
What is the significance of the touch command?
The touch command is used to create an empty file or update the access and modification timestamps of an existing file.

In how many ways can you create a file?
Files can be created in several ways, including using text editors (e.g., nano, vim), redirection (>, >>), or the touch command.

How to delete the content from a file?
You can delete the content of a file using a text editor or by redirecting an empty input into the file using the > operator.

Explain the process/work behind hitting google.com? How do you access google.com?
Accessing a website like google.com involves DNS resolution, where the domain name is translated into an IP address. Then, a request is sent to the web server hosting the website, and the server responds by sending back the web page content, which is displayed in your browser.

How many types of permissions are there? What is chmod?
There are three types of permissions: read (r), write (w), and execute (x). chmod is a command used to change file permissions in Linux.

What is sticky bit?
The sticky bit is a permission in Linux that can be set on directories. It allows only the owner of a file to delete or rename their files within that directory, even if others have write permissions to the directory.

What is ACLs?
ACLs (Access Control Lists) are a set of permissions beyond the traditional Unix permissions that can be applied to files and directories, allowing more fine-grained control over access.

What is SetGID, SetUID & Sticky bit?

SetGID: When set on a directory, it makes newly created files within that directory inherit the group ownership of the parent directory.
SetUID: When set on an executable file, it allows the file to run with the permissions of the file owner, rather than the user who executes it.
Sticky Bit: As mentioned earlier, it prevents users from deleting or renaming files owned by others in a shared directory.
Location where all the user information is stored?
User information is typically stored in the /etc/passwd file in Linux.

File where user passwords are stored?
User passwords are stored in the /etc/shadow file, which is readable only by privileged users.

What is the default permission of a file?
The default permission for a newly created file depends on the umask setting but is typically set to 644 (rw-r--r--), meaning the owner has read and write access, while others have read-only access.

What is the significance of -rvf?
-rvf is not a single option but a combination of multiple options used with various commands like rm or cp. For example, in rm -rvf, it stands for:

-r: Recursive (used for deleting directories and their contents).
-v: Verbose (displays detailed information about the operation).
-f: Force (forces the operation without asking for confirmation).
What is PV, VG & LV?

PV (Physical Volume): A physical disk or partition used in LVM (Logical Volume Manager).
VG (Volume Group): A collection of one or more PVs that are grouped together to create logical volumes.
LV (Logical Volume): A virtual partition created from a VG, which can be formatted and mounted like a physical partition.
What are the types of file systems?
There are various types of file systems in Linux, including Ext4, XFS, Btrfs, FAT32, and more.

What is XFS?
XFS is a high-performance, journaling file system that is commonly used in Linux for large-scale storage and data management.

Can we reduce XFS file system?
Yes, it is possible to reduce the size of an XFS file system, but it involves several steps, including unmounting the file system, reducing the size of the underlying block device, and resizing the XFS file system to match the new size.

How can we extend LV?
To extend a logical volume (LV), you can use the lvextend command to increase its size and then use the resize2fs command to resize the file system within the LV to use the newly allocated space.

Command to check running processes?
The ps command is used to check running processes. Common options include ps aux or ps -ef for a list of all processes.

Command to check RAM usage?
You can use the free command to check RAM usage and statistics.

Command to check disk usage?
The df command is used to check disk usage, and du is used to check directory-level disk usage.

Difference between ps -aux & top command?

ps aux: Lists all processes with detailed information.
top: Provides a dynamic, interactive view of system processes and resource usage.
What are the ways to check CPU usage?
You can check CPU usage using commands like top, htop, or mpstat. The top command is commonly used for this purpose.

How to check CPU details?
The lscpu or cat /proc/cpuinfo command can be used to check CPU details, including architecture, cores, and more.

Explain the steps to create a partition & how to format it with a file system?
Creating a partition involves using tools like fdisk or parted to create a partition on a disk or block device. Afterward, you can format the partition with a file system using commands like mkfs.ext4 for Ext4.

Explain the steps to create an LV?
Creating a logical volume (LV) involves several steps, including creating physical volumes (PVs), adding them to a volume group (VG), and finally creating an LV from the VG using the lvcreate command.

Explain steps to reduce XFS & EXT file systems?
Reducing the size of an XFS or EXT file system involves several steps, including resizing the file system, shrinking the LV, and, if necessary, reducing the size of the underlying physical volume.

Significance of .bashrc file?
The .bashrc file is a shell script that is executed each time a new interactive Bash shell session is started. It is commonly used to set environment variables, aliases, and customize the shell environment for users.

How do you check the kernel version?
You can check the kernel version using the uname -r command.

How do you check the Red Hat release version?
You can check the Red Hat release version using the cat /etc/redhat-release command.

Significance of resolv.conf file?
The resolv.conf file is used to configure DNS name resolution on Linux systems. It specifies the DNS servers that the system should use to resolve domain names.

What is DNS? How do you resolve DNS? Types of DNS records?
DNS (Domain Name System) is a system used to translate human-readable domain names (e.g., google.com) into IP addresses. It resolves DNS queries by consulting DNS servers and caches. Common DNS records include A (IPv4 address), AAAA (IPv6 address), CNAME (canonical name), MX (mail exchange), and more.

Difference between Nginx & HTTP Server?
Nginx is a popular web server and reverse proxy server known for its high performance and scalability. "HTTP Server" is a generic term that refers to any software or service that serves web content over HTTP, including Nginx.

Port numbers of HTTP, FTP, SSH, HTTPS?

HTTP: Port 80
FTP: Port 21
SSH: Port 22
HTTPS: Port 443
What is SSH? How do you generate SSH keys?
SSH (Secure Shell) is a network protocol used for secure remote access to systems. You can generate SSH keys using the ssh-keygen command, which creates a public key and a private key pair.

What is Private & Public Key? How do they authenticate?
In SSH, the private key is kept secret and is used for authentication, while the public key is shared with remote servers. Authentication occurs when a server verifies that the private key matches a stored public key on the server, granting access to the user.

Configuration file of SSH?
The SSH configuration file is typically located at /etc/ssh/sshd_config for the SSH server and ~/.ssh/config for SSH client-side configuration.

Configuration file of HTTP?
The configuration file for web servers like Apache HTTP Server or Nginx can vary but is often located at /etc/httpd/ or /etc/nginx/.

What is Virtual Hosting? How do you configure virtual hosting?
Virtual hosting allows a single web server to host multiple websites on the same IP address. It is configured by specifying different virtual hosts in the web server configuration, each with its own domain and document root.

Explain the ifconfig command?
ifconfig is used to configure network interfaces on Linux systems. It can display current network settings, enable/disable interfaces, and set IP addresses.

Difference between IPv4 & IPv6?
IPv4 uses 32-bit addresses and is the older and more widely used IP version, while IPv6 uses 128-bit addresses and was developed to address the exhaustion of IPv4 addresses and offer improved features.

What is a MAC address? Can we change the physical address?
A MAC (Media Access Control) address is a unique hardware address assigned to network interfaces. In most cases, MAC addresses are hardcoded into the network adapter and cannot be changed. However, some NICs support MAC address spoofing, allowing temporary changes.

How to check system uptime?
You can check system uptime using the uptime or w command.

How to check memory information?
You can check memory information using the free or cat /proc/meminfo command.

What is SWAP?
Swap is a portion of disk space used as virtual memory when physical RAM is exhausted. It allows the system to store less-used data temporarily on disk.

What is the exact memory free in your system?
You can check the exact free memory using the free -m command, which displays memory in megabytes.

What is cache memory?
Cache memory is high-speed volatile computer memory that provides high-speed data access to a processor and stores frequently used computer programs, applications, and data.

What happens if you run rm -rvf /?
Running rm -rvf / is a destructive command that recursively forces the removal of all files and directories starting from the root directory (/). It essentially wipes out the entire filesystem and can result in data loss. It should never be run on a production system.

Kinds of permission in Linux?
Linux permissions include read (r), write (w), execute (x), and three sets of permissions for the owner, group, and others.

What is vim & vi?
vi is a traditional Unix text editor, and vim (Vi IMproved) is an enhanced version of vi with additional features and functionality.

What is pipe |?
The pipe (|) is a command used to send the output of one command as input to another, allowing for the chaining of commands in a Unix-like shell.

What is grep command?
The grep command is used to search for patterns within text files. It is often used for text searching and manipulation.

What does the Find command do?
The find command is used to search for files and directories within a specified directory hierarchy based on various criteria, such as name, size, or modification time.

How to redirect command output?
Command output can be redirected using the > or >> operators to send it to a file, or using pipes (|) to send it as input to another command.

What is systemd in Linux?
Systemd is a system and service manager for Linux that is responsible for initializing and managing system services, daemons, and other processes during system boot and runtime.

What does systemctl do?
systemctl is a command-line utility for controlling systemd services, units, and managing the system's state.

If you run a command like nautilus in terminal, will it block your terminal or not?
Running a graphical command like nautilus in the terminal can block the terminal by holding the terminal session. You can add & to the end of the command (e.g., nautilus &) to run it in the background without blocking the terminal.

What is rsyslog?
Rsyslog is a high-performance syslog implementation used for system logging and management of log messages on Unix-like systems.

What is SSH tunnel?
An SSH tunnel is a secure encrypted connection established between a local port and a remote server. It can be used to secure and encrypt traffic between the local system and the remote server.

How to set history size?
The history size in the Bash shell can be set by modifying the HISTSIZE and HISTFILESIZE environment variables in the .bashrc file or other shell configuration files.

How to extend VG?
You can extend a volume group (VG) by adding physical volumes (PVs) to it using the vgextend command.

What are logical & extended partitions?
Logical partitions are partitions created within an extended partition on a disk. Extended partitions serve as containers for logical partitions and are used when you need more than four partitions on a disk.

Explain the steps to reset root password at boot time?
Resetting the root password at boot time involves rebooting into single-user mode, mounting the root file system, and using the passwd command to reset the password.

What are run-levels? How many types of run levels are there? How do we change the run level?
Runlevels are system states in Unix-like operating systems. Different runlevels are used for various system states, such as single-user mode or multi-user mode. The number of runlevels can vary between distributions. Runlevels can be changed using the init or systemctl command.

How to check the logs?
You can check system logs using tools like journalctl for systemd-based systems or traditional log files located in directories like /var/log/.

Difference between Journalctl & tail command?
journalctl is used to view and query systemd journal logs, while tail is a general-purpose command used to display the end of text files, including log files.

What does the subscription-manager do?
The subscription-manager command is used on Red Hat-based systems to manage system subscriptions and entitlements.

How to archive a file?
You can archive files using utilities like tar to create compressed or uncompressed archive files.

What is umask?
Umask is a command used to set the default permissions for newly created files and directories.

How to kill a process?
You can kill a process using the kill command followed by the process ID (PID) or with tools like pkill or killall.

How to assign an IP address manually?
You can assign an IP address manually using the ifconfig or ip command.

How to assign a static IP address to a system?
To assign a static IP address, you need to configure network settings in the system's network configuration files, such as /etc/network/interfaces (Debian/Ubuntu) or /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0 (RHEL/CentOS).

Explain the different types of Linux process states?
Linux processes can be in several states, including "Running," "Sleeping," "Stopped," "Zombie," and more. Each state represents a different condition of the process.

What is a Zombie process?
A Zombie process is a terminated process that has completed its execution but still has an entry in the process table. Zombies consume minimal system resources and are waiting for their parent process to retrieve their exit status.

What is KVM? What is a hypervisor?
KVM (Kernel-based Virtual Machine) is a Linux kernel module that allows hardware virtualization. A hypervisor is a software or hardware platform that enables multiple virtual machines (VMs) to run on a single physical host.

Difference between MBR & GPT?
MBR (Master Boot Record) and GPT (GUID Partition Table) are partitioning schemes used on disks. GPT is a newer and more flexible scheme, supporting larger disk sizes and more partitions than MBR.

How can you mount a file system permanently?
To mount a file system permanently, you can add an entry to the /etc/fstab file, which specifies the device, mount point, file system type, and mount options.

What is cron? How to set up a cron job?
Cron is a time-based job scheduler in Unix-like operating systems. You can set up a cron job by editing the user's crontab file using the crontab -e command and specifying the schedule and command to run.

What is a Kickstart file?
A Kickstart file is used for automating the installation of Red Hat-based Linux distributions. It contains configuration directives for the installation process.

What is NTP Server? How to configure NTP?
An NTP (Network Time Protocol) server is used to synchronize system time with a reference time source. You can configure NTP by editing the /etc/ntp.conf or /etc/chrony/chrony.conf file, specifying NTP servers to use.

